WEP1 - Opportunity Grant policy for Write the Docs conferences (#3)
writethedocs/weps: drafts/WEP0001.rst

* People can be reluctant, or even feel shameful about applying, so the process
  for applications should be encouraging and welcoming, even for people who
  feel they might not deserve it.
* Grants improve access for marginalised and underrepresented groups already,
  but an option can be to prioritise marginalised groups in allocations.
  Currently, this proposal is written with prioritisation of marginalised and
  underrepresented groups.

Speakers
--------

Accepted speakers are an essential part of the conference, and should
therefore have a special grant priority. All speakers and organisers will
receive a free ticket, as they already pay for their participation in the
conference with their volunteer time.

Either at the time of the CFP (in which case it should be stressed on this
form that choices will not influence talk selection) or later, all speakers
will be asked whether (pick one option):

* They are willing and able to pay their own costs completely.
* Their employer is funding their travel and accommodation.
* They would like to request a (partial) grant (if so, we need their details -
  a partial grant could mean "I need you to cover my flight, but I can arrange

>   my own accommodation".)

Reviewer: This feels a bit odd. How are we proposing to actually ask this question? It seems like a more obvious approach would be to include a question on the CFP about whether they need travel assistance.

I think that is what this is proposing, but implementing it might look different than the above questions.

Author: The CFP seems to be the place to ask, yes?

Reviewer 2: Do we want to ask accepted speakers? Or everyone? I think I'd lean to accepted only. Especially as if we don't we're going to have to correlate speakers that aren't accepted with the other process where people apply, or make folks apply twice.

Author: I think accepted speakers only can be a good choice, if the grant applications remain open long enough, i.e. until after (with some margin) we confirm/announce speakers.

Author: This has been updated.

If their employer is funding their attendance, the employer will be recognised

> as a low level sponsor (perhaps a bit higher in case of very expensive travel).

Reviewer: This adds a reasonably amount of overhead, but I generally agree it's a good idea. I imagine @plaindocs has more insight here, but I don't know a great way to handle this without making it a bit awkward and work for the speaker (eg. rounding up marketing folks, getting a logo approved, etc.)

Author: The minimum we can do is make this at the speaker's discretion. It's supposed to be more of a benefit to the speaker, not supposed to be a burden.

Reviewer 2: Unless speakers are struggling to convince employers to send them, it is a benefit to employers not to speakers themselves.

Some perhaps easier options might be:

* list sponsoring employers with text not logos
* provide a a logo upload form for the speaker, but not require them to use it.

Reviewer 2: I see you've addressed this in the next paragraph, sorry. Even so, would it make sense to add this if we find out that speakers are struggling to get support from employers?

Author: I am ambivalent about this. It's been a long time since I've been an employee. I am fine with dropping it for now and considering it for later.

Author: It has been dropped from the text.

This may help people to get funding from their employer. This is reasonable,

> as the employer is paying for a speaker's ability contribute. The CFP 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as the employer is paying for a speaker's ability to contribute. The CFP 
```

should make clear that we have this sponsor recognition policy, as it can help 
people talk to and convince their employers to fund the trip earlier.

Grants for speakers follow the regular process for assignment and handling,

> except that they are prioritised all other grant applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
except that they are prioritised over all other grant applications.
```

Regular grant requests
----------------------

(Prospective) attendees can request a grant through an application form.
Other than typical details like their name (both legal and preferred),
and contact details, the form should ask roughly these questions:

* What they do with documentation
* Why they want to attend Write the Docs
* An estimate for their costs (provide tips for looking on booking, airbnb,
  google flights and possibly others), split out by cost item.
  Travel and accommodation are typical costs, but applicants may specify

>   and ask for any costs they need covered to be able to attend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and ask for any costs they need covered to be able to attend, like childcare.
```

* Which country they live in
* Whether they are part of an underrepresented or marginalised group in tech

> 

Reviewer 3: Shall the form also guarantee adherence to Write the Docs code of conduct?

Author: Yes, that's a good addition, I'll add that.

Author: Actually, I'm not sure we need that. They'd get special links to register their ticket - all staff does as well - and the registration form has this question already. Feels a bit superfluous to ask twice.

Reviewer: I think it's probably worth mentioning the COC in the grant copy to set expectations, but yea, I don't know if we need a formal checkmark that they agree to it, since that would come with the ticket registration.

Author: I have added a note of this to our draft application form.

For the last question, we will clarify that underrepresented or marginalised 
groups in tech include, but are not limited to:

* women and other gender minorities of all expressions and identities;
  e.g. trans, agender and non-binary people
* people of color
* sexuality minorities, including asexual people
* people with disabilities, both visible and invisible
* neurodivergent people
* people with chronic illnesses or diseases
* religious and ethnic minorities
* age minorities (under ~21, over ~50)
* people experiencing poverty
* homeless and home/food insecure people
* caregivers of children or other dependents
* people who have experienced trauma and its aftermath (PTSD, anxiety, etc)
* people living with or recovering from substance abuse

Notably, applicants are never asked to identify which group they belong to.

Selection process
-----------------

All applications will be scored by the grant review team, which should

> consist of around for reviewers. The suggested tool is Grorg, but the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
consist of around four reviewers. The suggested tool is Grorg, but the
```

Did you happen to mean four here?

grant review team may choose different tools.

Reviewers can go through all applications one by one, and score them,
possibly with a comment. Scores, applicant names, and comments from others
should not be shown until the reviewer has provided a score. Scores can be

> updated, but this will be visible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
updated, but these updates will be logged and visible.
```
Does this clarify what you meant here? I was a bit confused at first 😅

The scoring should be based on the overall impact that granting this person
will have on them, the Write the Docs community, and the applicants wider
community and country, compared to others.
This is difficult to assess from a short form. Several guidelines are:

* To what extent will letting this person attend have a further impact on the
  community? For example, someone who essentially wrote “I will help my
  company make more money” should likely be scored lower than someone who is
  active in their local community.
* The social impact of their work can be a part too. “I work to help this
  bank I work for become richer” has less social impact than supporting someone
  who said “I work on projects to help addicted homeless people towards recovery”,
  and therefore the latter should be scored higher.
* Where is this person from? If they would take a large budget, but live in an

>   area that has many other conferences closer by, they may not be a great choice.

Reviewer: This almost captures it, but I think there's a bit more here. Maybe we need a line item like:

* Is there another WTD conference closer to the attendee? We generally try to send folks to the closest and cheapest option in our series of conferences. Someone in Germany for example should apply to Prague instead of Portland.

Author: Agreed, this has been clarified.

  So all other things being equal, we would rather spend € 1000 on an attendee

>   from Kenia than from Portland, Oregon, US.

Reviewer: I think we should try and keep all of these things in the same English-style, and American has won thus far :) I noticed it with `prioritization` and `marginalized` in this doc as well. 

```suggestion
  from Kenya than from Portland, Oregon, US.
```

* Are they making a basic effort? For example, if someone doesn't even have an

>   estimate of the price of their flight without further explanation, does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  estimate of the price of their flight without further explanation, they don't
```

  appear very motivated.
* Does this conference seem like an event that would benefit them? And do
  they have some understanding of what the conference is about?

After all scores are completed, the grant review team will discuss the top
applications, prioritised by underrepresented/marginalised groups first,
score second, and grant them unless discussion leads to another conclusion,
until funds run out. The review team is not required to always follow the
score based order. This also depends on the remaining resources.

Speakers will bypass the review process and are immediately accepted, except

> in exceptional circumstances.

Reviewer 3: should an example of exceptional circumstances be provided?

Author: In theory, yes. I couldn't think of any though, but I'm always a bit careful with defining hard unbendable rules in these kind of processes.

Author: In theory, yes. I couldn't think of any though, but I'm always a bit careful with defining hard unbendable rules in these kind of processes.

Notifying accepted applicants
-----------------------------

* All accepted applicants will be notified by the grant review team.

> * Applicants need to confirm they are still intending to participate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Applicants need to confirm they are still intending to participate.
```
Is there a recommended time frame for this confirmation? I think it might be helpful in some cases to have a 5-day timeout in which a no confirmation is understood as someone  who does not intend to participate

Author: Yeah, I'm thinking of something like a week? This should also be defined and communicated in advance, so that people know.

Author: This has been added. I've also left some room for applicants for whom responding within one week may be difficult.

  the selection is complete.
* When all accepted applicants are confirmed, the remaining not accepted
  applicants will be notified too.

Handling grants and funds
-------------------------

* Accepted applicants are encouraged to complete their bookings as soon
  as possible.
* Some may need to request a visa. In that case, the grant review team
  should stress that they should not book non-refundable travel or
  accommodation until their visa is confirmed. Upon request, an invitation
  letter will be provided, which should mention that costs are covered
  by the conference, as this can help with the visa application.
* Applicants need to provide booking confirmations for their costs.
  Upon receipt of the confirmations (which need to match their legal name),
  their costs will be refunded as soon as possible (within a few weeks).
  There may be costs involved in these transfers, which should be covered
  by the conference.
* In circumstances where it is not realistically possible, or prohibitively
  expensive, to transfer the funds, the refund can happen at the conference.
  This should be an exceptional case though, as not everyone can afford to
  miss these funds so long.

> * In very exceptional circumstances, transfers may be made before booking

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* In very exceptional circumstances, transfers may be made before booking
```

Just out of curiosity, is this more feasible than WTD or an external provider paid by WTD booking the tickets for them?

Author: We can add that as an option. Historically, I've been reluctant and nervous to book flights for other people, but it should be a possibility.

Author: This has been added, thanks :)

  confirmations are received. This applies to people that simply can not
  get the funds together to pay themselves in advance. This requires at least:
  - Complete details of what expense needs to be made and what for
  - Being a known member in the community, or a known and well trusted
    community member vouching for the applicant.
  Transfers of funds before booking confirmations are received are always
  at the discretion of the conference organisers.
* If people are unable to make it to the conference for reasons reasonably 

>   utside of their influence, for e.g. health reasons or because they are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  outside of their influence, for e.g. health reasons or because they are
```

  unable to pass immigration despite their visa, their grant will be honoured,
  but if some of their costs are still cancellable/refundable, they should 
  cancel those and refund the conference for those costs.
  Note that it may not always be possible for an applicant to prove why they

>   were not able to attend.

Reviewer: Not sure what this line means. Is it saying we will cover costs even if they can't show why they couldn't attend?

Author: I don't think they can always prove it. If I'm ill and nowhere near fit enough to travel to and attend a conference, I won't have any evidence to show that.

Reviewer: Right, but what is the outcome of this policy in that case?

Author: Then we should still cover their costs (or basically, we already have upon receipt of flight tickets and such). I don't see any other outcome. Otherwise we'd end up with: "I'm sorry you were ill and couldn't make it, and also could not afford to go to a doctor to get a note (or doctors in your country just refuse), and now also please pay back the cost of your non-refundable flight".
It has a small risk of fraud, but we have that always, unless we refund people only at the end of the conference.

Assistance with accommodation
-----------------------------

> Most grants will include funding for accommodation. It is possible to have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many grants will include funding for accommodation. It is possible to have
```

recipients book their own accommodation, but an alternative is for the
conference to assist with this. Organisers may be better informed on
affordable places to stay, and booking multiple rooms may make discounts
possible. This can range from organisers booking accommodation for grant
recipients, to providing tips on places to stay.

In either case, the amount granted for accommodation can be adjusted to
match reasonable available options.

Organisers can suggest that grant recipients share space, but recipients
should never feel pressured to accept a shared room, and should not be asked
to explain their choice not to share a room.

Unexpected additional costs
---------------------------

Sometimes grant recipients need additional funding due to changed
circumstances, or due to unexpected incidental costs incurred during the
conference.

Accepted grant recipients that encounter these additional costs that cause
difficulties for them, can ask the conference to cover costs in addition to
their grant. This is at the discretion of local conference organisers in
coordination with the grant review team.

> Other important conditions

Reviewer 3: These are all great 💯

Author: Thanks! :)

The form should mention that upon notification, accepted applicants will 
have one week to confirm. If that is difficult, the applicant should clarify
that in the form.

For the last question, we will clarify that underrepresented or marginalized 
groups in tech include, but are not limited to:

* women and other gender minorities of all expressions and identities;
  e.g. trans, agender and non-binary people
* people of color
* sexuality minorities, including asexual people
* people with disabilities, both visible and invisible
* neurodivergent people
* people with chronic illnesses or diseases
* religious and ethnic minorities
* age minorities (under ~21, over ~50)
* people experiencing poverty
* homeless and home/food insecure people
* caregivers of children or other dependents
* people who have experienced trauma and its aftermath (PTSD, anxiety, etc)
* people living with or recovering from substance abuse

Notably, applicants are never asked to identify which group they belong to.

Selection process
-----------------

All applications will be scored by the grant review team, which should
consist of around four reviewers. The suggested tool is Grorg, but the

> grant review team may choose different tools.

Reviewer 2: Strongly suggest a tool that handles email as well as selection.

  estimate of the price of their flight without further explanation, they don't
  appear very motivated.
* Does this conference seem like an event that would benefit them? And do
  they have some understanding of what the conference is about?

After all scores are completed, the grant review team will discuss the top
applications, prioritized by underrepresented/marginalized groups first,
score second, and grant them unless discussion leads to another conclusion,
until funds run out. The review team is not required to always follow the
score based order. This also depends on the remaining resources.

Speakers will bypass the review process and are immediately accepted, except
in exceptional circumstances.

Notifying accepted applicants
-----------------------------

* All accepted applicants will be notified by the grant review team.
* Applicants need to confirm they are still intending to participate
  within one week. This term can be extended if requested in the
  application.
* If they withdraw their application, the grant review team may be able
  provide a few extra applicants with grants, prioritized by score.

> * Applicants that are very low on the list, and basically certain not to

Reviewer 2: This seems tricky to get right.

Author: I'm not sure which part you think is tricky?

Reviewer 2: I'm thinking about the time uncertainty around withdrawal and reallocation.

Author: The confirmation period is (except for special circumstances) one week, so I think we still have a good chance of accepting an additional few grants in the timeframe. In my experience, this is no more than a handful of cases. I think it makes sense to at least try.

  by the conference, as this can help with the visa application.
* Applicants need to provide booking confirmations for their costs.
  Upon receipt of the confirmations (which need to match their legal name),
  their costs will be refunded as soon as possible (within a few weeks).
  There may be costs involved in these transfers, which should be covered
  by the conference.
* In circumstances where it is not realistically possible, or prohibitively
  expensive, to transfer the funds, the refund can happen at the conference.
  This should be an exceptional case though, as not everyone can afford to
  miss these funds so long.
* In very exceptional circumstances, transfers may be made before booking
  confirmations are received. This applies to people that simply can not
  get the funds together to pay themselves in advance. This requires at least:
  - Complete details of what expense needs to be made and what for
  - Being a known member in the community, or a known and well trusted
    community member vouching for the applicant.
  Transfers of funds before booking confirmations are received are always
  at the discretion of the conference organisers.

>   An alternative option is for conference organisers to pay for or book

Reviewer 2: I'd like this to be the exception, not the rule.

Author: It should be - I will clarify the wording.

Author: The wording has been clarified.
